<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Postscript</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Postscript</h2>
			<p>These are the things of which men think, who live: of their own selves and the dwelling place of their fathers; of their neighbors; of work and service; of rule and reason and women and children; of Beauty and Death and War. To this thinking I have only to add a point of view: I have been in the world, but not of it. I have seen the human drama from a veiled corner, where all the outer tragedy and comedy have reproduced themselves in microcosm within. From this inner torment of souls the human scene without has interpreted itself to me in unusual and even illuminating ways. For this reason, and this alone, I venture to write again on themes on which great souls have already said greater words, in the hope that I may strike here and there a halftone, newer even if slighter, up from the heart of my problem and the problems of my people.</p>
			<p>Between the sterner flights of logic, I have sought to set some little alightings of what may be poetry. They are tributes to Beauty, unworthy to stand alone; yet perversely, in my mind, now at the end, I know not whether I mean the Thought for the Fancy⁠—or the Fancy for the Thought, or why the book trails off to playing, rather than standing strong on unanswering fact. But this is alway⁠—is it not?⁠—the Riddle of Life.</p>
			<p>Many of my words appear here transformed from other publications and I thank the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Atlantic</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Independent</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Crisis</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of Race Development</i> for letting me use them again.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Burghardt Du Bois.</p>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">New York, 1919.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
